README.md, before:

# Project-oriented workflow in Python

Finding project directories in Python (data science) projects.

This library aims to provide both
the programmatic functionality from the R [`rprojroot`][rprojroot] package
and the interactive functionality from the R [`here`][here] package.

## Motivation

**Problem**: I have a project that has a specific folder structure,
for example, one mentioned in [Noble 2009][noble2009] or something similar to [this project template][project-template],
and I want to be able to:

1. Run my python scripts without having to specify a series of `../` to get to the `data` folder.
2. `cd` into the directory of my python script instead of calling it from the root project directory and specify all the folders to the script.
3. Reference datasets from a root directory when using a jupyter notebook because everytime I use a jupyter notebook,
  the working directory changes to the location of the notebook, not where I launched the notebook server.

**Solution**: `pyprojroot` finds the root working directory for your project as a `pathlib.Path` object.
You can now use the `here` function to pass in a relative path from the project root directory
(no matter what working directory you are in the project),
and you will get a full path to the specified file.
That is, in a jupyter notebook,
you can write something like `pandas.read_csv(here('data/my_data.csv'))`
instead of `pandas.read_csv('../data/my_data.csv')`.
This allows you to restructure the files in your project without having to worry about changing file paths.

Great for reading and writing datasets!

Further reading:

* [Project-oriented workflows](https://www.tidyverse.org/articles/2017/12/workflow-vs-script/)
* [Stop the working directory insanity](https://gist.github.com/jennybc/362f52446fe1ebc4c49f)
* [Ode to the here package](https://github.com/jennybc/here_here)

## Installation

### pip

```bash
python -m pip install pyprojroot
```

### conda

https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/pyprojroot

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge pyprojroot
```

## Example Usage

### Interactive

This is based on the R [`here`][here] library.

```python
from pyprojroot.here import here

here()
```

### Programmatic

This based on the R [`rprojroot`][rprojroot] library.

```python
import pyprojroot

base_path = pyprojroot.find_root(pyprojroot.has_dir(".git"))
```

## Demonstration

Load the packages

```
In [1]: from pyprojroot.here import here
In [2]: import pandas as pd
```

The current working directory is the "notebooks" folder

```
In [3]: !pwd
/home/dchen/git/hub/scipy-2019-pandas/notebooks
```

In the notebooks folder, I have all my notebooks

```
In [4]: !ls
01-intro.ipynb  02-tidy.ipynb  03-apply.ipynb  04-plots.ipynb  05-model.ipynb  Untitled.ipynb
```

If I wanted to access data in my notebooks I'd have to use `../data`

```
In [5]: !ls ../data
billboard.csv  country_timeseries.csv  gapminder.tsv  pew.csv  table1.csv  table2.csv  table3.csv  table4a.csv  table4b.csv  weather.csv
```

However, with there `here` function, I can access my data all from the project root.
This means if I move the notebook to another folder or subfolder I don't have to change the path to my data.
Only if I move the data to another folder would I need to change the path in my notebook (or script)

```
In [6]: pd.read_csv(here('data/gapminder.tsv'), sep='\t').head()
Out[6]:
       country continent  year  lifeExp       pop   gdpPercap
0  Afghanistan      Asia  1952   28.801   8425333  779.445314
1  Afghanistan      Asia  1957   30.332   9240934  820.853030
2  Afghanistan      Asia  1962   31.997  10267083  853.100710
3  Afghanistan      Asia  1967   34.020  11537966  836.197138
4  Afghanistan      Asia  1972   36.088  13079460  739.981106
```

By the way, you get a `pathlib.Path` object path back!

```
In [7]: here('data/gapminder.tsv')
Out[7]: PosixPath('/home/dchen/git/hub/scipy-2019-pandas/data/gapminder.tsv')
```

[here]: https://github.com/r-lib/here
[rprojroot]: https://github.com/r-lib/rprojroot
[noble2009]: https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000424
[project-template]: https://chendaniely.github.io/sdal/2017/05/30/project_templates/

Commit message:

Add background about files to Example Usage section

README.md, after:

# Project-oriented workflow in Python

Finding project directories in Python (data science) projects.

This library aims to provide both
the programmatic functionality from the R [`rprojroot`][rprojroot] package
and the interactive functionality from the R [`here`][here] package.

## Motivation

**Problem**: I have a project that has a specific folder structure,
for example, one mentioned in [Noble 2009][noble2009] or something similar to [this project template][project-template],
and I want to be able to:

1. Run my python scripts without having to specify a series of `../` to get to the `data` folder.
2. `cd` into the directory of my python script instead of calling it from the root project directory and specify all the folders to the script.
3. Reference datasets from a root directory when using a jupyter notebook because everytime I use a jupyter notebook,
  the working directory changes to the location of the notebook, not where I launched the notebook server.

**Solution**: `pyprojroot` finds the root working directory for your project as a `pathlib.Path` object.
You can now use the `here` function to pass in a relative path from the project root directory
(no matter what working directory you are in the project),
and you will get a full path to the specified file.
That is, in a jupyter notebook,
you can write something like `pandas.read_csv(here('data/my_data.csv'))`
instead of `pandas.read_csv('../data/my_data.csv')`.
This allows you to restructure the files in your project without having to worry about changing file paths.

Great for reading and writing datasets!

Further reading:

* [Project-oriented workflows](https://www.tidyverse.org/articles/2017/12/workflow-vs-script/)
* [Stop the working directory insanity](https://gist.github.com/jennybc/362f52446fe1ebc4c49f)
* [Ode to the here package](https://github.com/jennybc/here_here)

## Installation

### pip

```bash
python -m pip install pyprojroot
```

### conda

https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/pyprojroot

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge pyprojroot
```

## Example Usage

`pyprojroot` looks for certain files like `.here` or `.git` to identify the `here` directory. To make any of the following examples work, you'll need one of those files in the current directory or one of its parents. (For the complete list of files, see [here.py](src/pyprojroot/here.py).)

### Interactive

This is based on the R [`here`][here] library.

```python
from pyprojroot.here import here

here()
```

### Programmatic

This based on the R [`rprojroot`][rprojroot] library.

```python
import pyprojroot

base_path = pyprojroot.find_root(pyprojroot.has_dir(".git"))
```

## Demonstration

Load the packages

```
In [1]: from pyprojroot.here import here
In [2]: import pandas as pd
```

The current working directory is the "notebooks" folder

```
In [3]: !pwd
/home/dchen/git/hub/scipy-2019-pandas/notebooks
```

In the notebooks folder, I have all my notebooks

```
In [4]: !ls
01-intro.ipynb  02-tidy.ipynb  03-apply.ipynb  04-plots.ipynb  05-model.ipynb  Untitled.ipynb
```

If I wanted to access data in my notebooks I'd have to use `../data`

```
In [5]: !ls ../data
billboard.csv  country_timeseries.csv  gapminder.tsv  pew.csv  table1.csv  table2.csv  table3.csv  table4a.csv  table4b.csv  weather.csv
```

However, with there `here` function, I can access my data all from the project root.
This means if I move the notebook to another folder or subfolder I don't have to change the path to my data.
Only if I move the data to another folder would I need to change the path in my notebook (or script)

```
In [6]: pd.read_csv(here('data/gapminder.tsv'), sep='\t').head()
Out[6]:
       country continent  year  lifeExp       pop   gdpPercap
0  Afghanistan      Asia  1952   28.801   8425333  779.445314
1  Afghanistan      Asia  1957   30.332   9240934  820.853030
2  Afghanistan      Asia  1962   31.997  10267083  853.100710
3  Afghanistan      Asia  1967   34.020  11537966  836.197138
4  Afghanistan      Asia  1972   36.088  13079460  739.981106
```

By the way, you get a `pathlib.Path` object path back!

```
In [7]: here('data/gapminder.tsv')
Out[7]: PosixPath('/home/dchen/git/hub/scipy-2019-pandas/data/gapminder.tsv')
```

[here]: https://github.com/r-lib/here
[rprojroot]: https://github.com/r-lib/rprojroot
[noble2009]: https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000424
[project-template]: https://chendaniely.github.io/sdal/2017/05/30/project_templates/
